.\" Man page for btrfs-backup-ng raw
.TH BTRFS-BACKUP-NG-RAW 1 "July 2026" "btrfs-backup-ng" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
btrfs-backup-ng-raw \- inspect and maintain raw-target backups
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw list
\fITARGET\fR [\fB\-\-json\fR] [\fB\-\-ssh-sudo\fR]
.br
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw verify
\fITARGET\fR [\fB\-\-snapshot\fR \fINAME\fR] [\fB\-\-json\fR] [\fB\-\-ssh-sudo\fR]
.br
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw backfill-metadata
\fITARGET\fR [\fB\-\-dry-run\fR] [\fB\-\-json\fR] [\fB\-\-ssh-sudo\fR]
.br
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw encrypt
\fITARGET\fR \fB\-\-encrypt\fR \fIMETHOD\fR [\fB\-\-shred\fR] [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Operate directly on a raw backup target. Raw targets (\fBraw://\fR and
\fBraw+ssh://\fR) store btrfs send streams as files for backing up to non-btrfs
storage (NFS, SMB, cloud, another OS). Each stream is written with an
authoritative \fB.meta\fR sidecar recording its pipeline (compression, encryption,
cipher), size, provenance, and creation time.
.PP
These subcommands read and maintain such a target directly, independently of any
configured backup job.
.PP
On a local \fBraw://\fR target, mutating operations (a backup's commit, prune,
\fBbackfill-metadata\fR, and \fBencrypt\fR) hold an exclusive per-target lock so
they serialize instead of racing. The lock is an empty \fB.btrfs-backup-ng.lock\fR
file in the target directory, created mode \fB0600\fR; it is safe to leave in place
and is never listed as a backup. Because the lock lives inside the target
directory, that directory must not be writable by untrusted users. Remote
\fBraw+ssh://\fR maintenance is not yet lock-protected.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.SS list
List the backups a raw target holds.
.PP
.RS
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw list
\fITARGET\fR [\fB\-\-json\fR] [\fB\-\-ssh-sudo\fR]
.RE
.PP
Enumerates the target's backups from each stream's \fB.meta\fR sidecar, falling
back to filename inference for legacy streams written before sidecars existed.
The human-readable output lists each backup's name, creation time, size, and
pipeline (encryption method, compression, openssl cipher, and metadata origin).
.TP
.I TARGET
Raw target to inspect: \fBraw://\fIPATH\fR (local),
\fBraw+ssh://\fR[\fIUSER\fR@]\fIHOST\fR/\fIPATH\fR (remote over SSH), or a plain
path (treated as \fBraw://\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output the authoritative sidecar documents as JSON for scripting.
.TP
.B \-\-ssh-sudo
Use \fBsudo\fR for the remote commands on a \fBraw+ssh://\fR target.
.SS verify
Verify raw backups against their recorded checksums.
.PP
.RS
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw verify
\fITARGET\fR [\fB\-\-snapshot\fR \fINAME\fR] [\fB\-\-json\fR] [\fB\-\-ssh-sudo\fR]
.RE
.PP
Recomputes each stream's sha256 and compares it to the value recorded in its
\fB.meta\fR sidecar. For a \fBraw+ssh://\fR target the hash is computed on the
remote host, so streams are not re-downloaded. Each backup is reported as
.B ok
(matches),
.B corrupt
(the stored stream differs from what was backed up),
.B error
(the stream could not be read or hashed), or
.B unverifiable
(no checksum was recorded -- a legacy backup, or a best-effort write-time seal
that failed).
.PP
verify confirms a stream still matches the checksum in its own sidecar -- an
integrity/consistency check, not authenticity: an attacker who can rewrite both
the stream and its sidecar can make a corrupted backup report
.BR ok .
For a \fBraw+ssh://\fR target the hash is recomputed ON the (untrusted) remote
host, so an
.B ok
verdict only confirms the recorded checksum and cannot detect corruption or
tampering introduced by a compromised target. For tamper-evident verification,
verify a locally-mounted copy (\fBraw://\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-snapshot " NAME"
Verify only the named snapshot.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output per-snapshot results in JSON format.
.TP
.B \-\-ssh-sudo
Use \fBsudo\fR for the remote commands on a \fBraw+ssh://\fR target.
.SS backfill-metadata
Write authoritative \fB.meta\fR sidecars for LEGACY streams that have none.
.PP
.RS
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw backfill-metadata
\fITARGET\fR [\fB\-\-dry-run\fR] [\fB\-\-json\fR] [\fB\-\-ssh-sudo\fR]
.RE
.PP
For backups written before sidecars existed (or by another tool such as btrbk).
New backups already write their sidecar automatically; this is only for
pre-existing streams. Each backfilled sidecar records the pipeline inferred from
the filename and a sha256 of the stream as it exists now, and is stamped
.B provenance_origin=backfill
with
.BR stream_completeness=unknown :
a legacy stream's completeness cannot be proven, so a backfilled sidecar is a
reconstructed, non-authoritative record. The checksum lets
.B raw verify
detect later corruption, not confirm the original backup was complete. On a local
.B raw://
target this holds the per-target lock, so a concurrent backup or prune serializes
against it; on a
.B raw+ssh://
target the lock is a no-op (remote locking is not yet implemented) and the command
warns you, so run remote maintenance while the target is idle.
.TP
.B \-\-dry-run
Show which streams would be backfilled without writing anything.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output per-stream results in JSON format.
.TP
.B \-\-ssh-sudo
Use \fBsudo\fR for the remote commands on a \fBraw+ssh://\fR target.
.SS encrypt
Encrypt raw streams that were written as plaintext (remediation for
GHSA-vr25-6vrh-869j).
.PP
.RS
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw encrypt
\fITARGET\fR \fB\-\-encrypt\fR \fIMETHOD\fR [\fB\-\-gpg-recipient\fR \fIKEYID\fR]
[\fB\-\-openssl-cipher\fR \fICIPHER\fR] [\fB\-\-shred\fR] [\fB\-\-yes\fR]
[\fB\-\-dry-run\fR] [\fB\-\-json\fR]
.RE
.PP
Runs LOCALLY only so the passphrase/keys never leave this host; for a remote
target, mount it and use a \fBraw://\fR path. For each plaintext stream, writes an
encrypted copy alongside it (new sidecar, \fBprovenance.origin=remediation\fR), then
runs a LIVE decrypt-to-identical proof (decrypts the new stream and confirms it is
byte-identical to the plaintext). The plaintext is removed ONLY when that proof
passes AND
.B \-\-shred
was given; by default it is kept. For gpg the proof needs the secret key on this
host -- if absent, the encrypted copy is written but the plaintext is kept.
.PP
.B \-\-shred
removes the plaintext with a plain unlink. On copy-on-write filesystems (btrfs) and
SSDs this does NOT securely erase the underlying blocks; true physical erasure
relies on device-level trim/discard or full-disk encryption at rest, which this tool
cannot provide, and prior exposure cannot be undone.
.TP
.BI \-\-encrypt " METHOD"
Encryption method to apply:
.B gpg
or
.BR openssl_enc .
Required.
.TP
.BI \-\-gpg-recipient " KEYID"
GPG recipient key (required with \fB\-\-encrypt gpg\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-openssl-cipher " CIPHER"
OpenSSL cipher for \fBopenssl_enc\fR (default aes-256-cbc).
.TP
.B \-\-shred
Remove each plaintext file after a verified decrypt proof (plain unlink).
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Do not prompt before removing plaintext (for scripts; with \fB\-\-shred\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-dry-run
Show which plaintext streams would be encrypted, without changes.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output per-stream results in JSON format.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success. For \fBlist\fR, includes an empty or nonexistent target (a warning is
printed for a missing local path). For \fBverify\fR, all backups are
.B ok
or
.BR unverifiable .
For \fBbackfill-metadata\fR, all candidate sidecars were written (or none were
needed).
.TP
.B 1
For \fBlist\fR, the target could not be listed. For \fBverify\fR, at least one
backup is
.B corrupt
or
.BR error .
For \fBbackfill-metadata\fR, at least one sidecar could not be written. For
\fBencrypt\fR, a stream could not be encrypted, or \fB\-\-shred\fR was requested but
a plaintext could not be safely removed (proof failed or unlink error).
.TP
.B 2
Invalid target (for example a non-raw URL scheme), or a
.B \-\-snapshot
name that is not present.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
List a local raw target:
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw list raw:///mnt/usb/backups
.TP
List a plain path (treated as raw://):
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw list /mnt/usb/backups
.TP
List a remote raw+ssh target with sudo:
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw list raw+ssh://backup@nas/backups --ssh-sudo
.TP
Machine-readable output:
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw list raw:///mnt/usb/backups --json
.TP
Verify every backup a target holds:
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw verify raw:///mnt/usb/backups
.TP
Verify a single backup on a remote target:
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw verify raw+ssh://backup@nas/backups --snapshot root.20260101T120000
.TP
Preview backfilling sidecars for legacy streams:
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw backfill-metadata raw:///mnt/usb/backups --dry-run
.TP
Backfill sidecars for legacy streams:
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw backfill-metadata raw:///mnt/usb/backups
.TP
Encrypt plaintext backups with openssl (keeping the plaintext):
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw encrypt raw:///mnt/usb/backups --encrypt openssl_enc
.TP
Encrypt and then remove the plaintext after a verified proof:
.B btrfs-backup-ng raw encrypt raw:///mnt/usb/backups --encrypt openssl_enc --shred
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR btrfs-backup-ng (1),
.BR btrfs-backup-ng-restore (1),
.BR btrfs-send (8),
.BR btrfs-receive (8)
.SH NOTES
A \fBraw+ssh://\fR target is a POSIX-shell-remote model: btrfs-backup-ng runs
\fBsh\fR, \fBcat\fR, \fBmv\fR, and \fBstat\fR over SSH on the remote host. For a
non-POSIX or SMB/NFS/cloud destination, mount it locally and use a \fBraw://\fR
path instead.
